---
title: Algorithm, Culture and Social Engineering (2)
tags: SHITS AND GIGGLES
description: At the intersection yet unknown, where will an addicted civilization relinquished of its decision-making spiral down to? (Part 2)
slug: algorithm-culture-and-social-engineering-2
date: 05.06.2021
genre: essay
myid: 1
---


#### 3) YouTube

One redeeming quality of Netflix is, it's less addictive than YouTube, crack of the internet. If people had their COVID vices, mine was YouTube hell hole. What illusory sense of control I have initially, eventually becomes what puppies do when a ball is about to be thrown -- I stare and wait patiently for the next video. Like the dog, I also never fail to pursue the action. Ball flies, dog sprints; video plays, I watch. Pavlov and his dog have become one. More interestingly, if I let the algorithm play out, there seems to be a preselected path to which of my 20th video will be. Now, if there's a pool of videos favoured by AI, whether based on topic or length, will our algorithmic destiny lead us to the same videos? Have I lost my free will?

No other platform demonstrates the power of algorithm as much as YouTube does. Yet no one seems to know how exactly it works (though same could be said about machine learning in general). While YouTube has published a whitepaper on its algorithms in 2016, its exact preferences were not obvious and remains speculative to the public. There are though plenty of articles written on how to gain favourability by its AI that I won't detail. The understanding of AI's working is perhaps more elusive to me as a viewer. From prioritizing videos of certain YouTubers and topics, to recommending videos on keywords in my recent Google searches, the algorithmic changes are swift and subtle. 

Furthermore, the existence of YouTube AI logically leads to two phenomenon. First is the aforementioned algorithmic "destiny" to one's content consumption, generalizable to YouTube audiences as a whole. Second is creators self-regulating or fine-tuning their content to gain AI favourability. This means whatever content bias YouTube AI had, would be exacerbated by creators who decide to focus their content on these biases. I came across several book recommendation videos, and was perplexed to find "Atomic Habits" and "40 Hour Work week" high in the majority of lists. Seeing stoicism also somehow everyone's favourite philosophy (don't get me wrong, I am also a fan of Marcus Aurelius and Seneca), I wonder if it's the algorithm or has the algorithm-induced homogeneity of ideas finally arrived? 

As I reminisce my year of self-help in 2017, I recognize the hypocrisy that my favourite books in this genre are cult favourites that precedes YouTube. My taste is a product of dominant culture. Observing the evolution of self-help popularity, I find its determinants have merely shifted platforms, from word-of-mouth to publishing, to broadcasting, to the current internet. An element of homogeneity, a term which now seems inaccurate for what I now mean by popularity or mainstreamness, is perhaps a force for culture that precedes algorithm. Art or ideas, shared at the right place, right time, becomes mainstream. Selene Dione has reached places far beyond the internet. However, with the ability to share videos skewed to a formula at a revolutionary rate, YouTube now is creating mega-mainstream phenomenon. If I wasn't judgemental about mainstreamness preceding algorithms, could I now be? While a myriad of societal factors may have contributed to a phenomenon pre-YouTube, in that being an algorithmic one, I feel wronged.   

Delegating YouTube my consumption decisions thus no longer seem innocent. Understanding my knowledge affects my behaviour and likely my identity, I might be a living illustration of algorithmically-induced changes. We might be also adapting more similarly to each other because of the pool of the content favoured by the algorithm. Now in knowing I've been altered, do I accept the presence of algorithms in order to accept myself. Or do I reject it, and live in conflict with parts of my life that cannot be divorced from AI?

At the intersection of two monstrous social narratives, one pertaining information censorship and bias, the other on algorithmic prevalence, the way we absorb politics, writing, movies, TVs, ideas and values, aspects that comprise our culture is transforming rapidly. AI's influences are also more insidious than what the "fake news" narrative revealed. Netflix and YouTube can skew our knowledge and artistic tastes, if not already, our values and identity. Nevertheless, a discussion on algorithm, culture and social engineering does not stop here. Depending on which of anthropologies, sociologist, psychologist, culture is defined differently, though a popular one of Edward Talor, 1872 is " that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, customs, and any other capabilities and habits by man as a member of society." If considering societal behaviour as an element of culture, should we examine another side of this issue, on Big Data, financial institutions and behavioural modelling? Should I also rant about my gripe with Wikipedia? Luckily, my frustration is dampened by my exhaustion. 

One might condemn or ridicule China's plans for state-facilitated social engineering, where citizens receive a social score that affects their reputation, chances of promotion, access to goods and services. However, isn't it more eerie under capitalism, algorithm from different tech companies, different industries have also convergently emerged to engineer our behaviour? With the goal of modelling good citizens, state-facilitated social engineering produces some level of success, in the case of Singapore's previous PM Lee Kuan Yew's administration (Wikinson, 1988). However, what happens when there's a lack of intentionality? In exchange of convenience, I, or may I say we, have already relinquished our personal data and decision making, of which slippery slope leads to a palpitating future. Will it be the same well I'm currently squatting in, just infinitely darker and deeper? I have also finally given up on my despair. Culture is by definition driven by norms and mainstreamness. I've never had any personal influence beside playing my less than a billion part, and AI, fundamentally equations scripted together, has not changed that. Why do I despair? 
