---
title: Algorithm, Culture and Social Engineering (1)
tags: SHITS AND GIGGLES
description: At the intersection yet unknown, where will an addicted civilization relinquished of its decision-making spiral down to? (Part 1)
slug: algorithm-culture-and-social-engineering-1
date: 05.06.2021
genre: essay
myid: 1
---

Some 2am, eyes slightly blood-shot and fingers utterly paralysed, I wait patiently for the "watch next" circle to fill up. In my 4 months of winter nesting, Alphabet knew me in ways my friends never would, and has in return shaped me in inexplicable ways. Having never touched a spear gun in my life, I've somehow acquired a niche knowledge of spear fishing. Indeed, as algorithms gradually canopy our environment, how much are they influencing our knowledge, values and identity? Looming with my personal anxiety are three rising social commentaries, and where they meet inspires my despair. The first is social media addiction as a design axiom of tech companies (ironically explored in a Netflix documentary "Social Dilemma"). With our eyeballs heavily capitalized, there is no turning back in increasing media consumption. Second is information bias, gatekeeping, manipulation, censorship, de-platforming by information conglomerates. The more information we consume, the more bias we likely absorb. The third narrative arises when artificial intelligence (AI) is considered in both previous stories, leading to a public anxiety. Whose responsibility is the ethics of AI? Regulators with a lacking expertise, inventors, or us, the consumers? At the intersection yet unknown, where will an addicted civilization relinquished of its decision-making spiral down to?  
   

    
### **Point of Reference, Before the Internet** 
 
Big corporates' sifting and moulding of our cultural and political views has been ubiquitous throughout history. Hearing "I'm going to make him an offer," one might instinctually add, " he can't refuse." When TV shows added laugh tracks, we were conditioned to anticipate comedy. When "the Office" decisively removed this comedic aid, we were re-sensitized to jokes. With a snap of a finger, CEOs of broadcasting company and Hollywood dictate which show goes on prime time, or becomes a blockbuster in cinemas, of which make their eventual way to our mundane conversations. We had as much freedom to appreciate culture as culture was available. Though behind the majority of socio-cultural phenomena stands a giant record label, broadcasting, publishing or media company. 

Then there's the advertising industry. Not only in itself an agent of consumption, marketing products from companies to customers, but also one nursing the monstrous value of capitalism. From its birth from ancient Egypt to today, advertising industry has only proliferated as a malignant tumour. Metastasizing each organ it touches, marketing has spread its psychological principles far beyond ad industry alone. Now industries after industries, websites after websites are leveraging our eyeballs for their value. How much of our global capitalistic and now attention-driven value is shaped by this industry alone?

An essay on institutional censorship and information gatekeeping would be unjust if Edward Herman and Noam Chomsky's "Manufacturing Consent" goes unmentioned. Debuted three decades ago, the book crowns the most important commentary on media censorship. In their research, the authors show how media bias and omission occurs as often unintentional effect of its capitalistic operations and the mechanisms through which they occur. Listing just a few, journalists and editors may pander to CEOs, investors and other stakeholders, such as advertisers, for article approval. Furthermore, it is more labour and cost intensive to conduct one's own research during the shortening news cycle. Taking government's statements or other sources as facts, and the lack of critical thinking is simply cheaper. 

By reconstituting history from journals and interviews published outside US, Chomsky reveals the history alien to many Americans. During Vietnam War, US had dropped more bombs in South Vietnam supposedly under US protection, than North Vietnam, the "commies", the enemy. This was done of course in US's geopolitical interest and was hidden from US media using a combination of the aforementioned mechanisms. Turning also a bind eye to Khmer Rouge's genocide in Cambodia initially, US only started condemning the group when the North Vietnam army escaped to Cambodia -- it was convenient. What's most harrowing was when the North Vietnamese troops escaped to Laos' dense forests and US dropped more bombs in Laos than what's combined during WWII. As disillusioning as this history may be, it shows a bleak reality of how media misinformation occurs as a sterile, unintentional by-product of capitalism. Yet, the consumer machine has shaped contemporary political stories and textbooks perspectives of history.
  
  
  
### **Cultural Engineering Today** 

#### 1) Media and writing

Whether media bias was fueled by a lack of critical thinking during the Indochina was or not, it is happening today. The epitome of irony is ABC publishing an article "Why are Australians so divided on COVID vaccines" when ABC itself heavily part-took in the fear-mongering of AZ blood-clot link. As of the date I'm writing, many articles included "rare blood clot" in the title of their coverage without mentioning the actual condition, heparin-induced thrombosis-like events. Similar to one another, different media seem to have convergently decided "rare blood clot" is the most provocative phrase. Furthermore, using "four people in a million" as opposed to 0.0004% to represent statistics, articles seem to appeal to human emotion factors as opposed to mathematics. Before having any studies on the effect of vaccination on the prevalence of HIT-like thrombosis, how can media be so quick to show bias against vaccines? 
  
While the chomsky-esque mechanisms likely still underly current operation of news media, it is infinitely exacerbated by social media's algorithms. [This article](https://theconversation.com/facebook-and-google-used-to-be-the-future-of-news-but-now-media-companies-need-more-strings-to-their-bow-145024) from the Conversation summarize how the content format of traditional media evolved to include more clickbait titles and videos for attention. Furthermore, content sharing department also grew heavily dependent on Facebook's AI. The "fake news" accusations that took storm in 2018 led FB to change its algorithm, directly impacting the company profit and its subsequent decision to lay off staff. As Australian regulators flopped the news media ban on Facebook February this year, big tech companies and the persistence of their AI seem more invincible than ever. 

Is it surprising that the table has turned? That AI now controls both traditional and social media, as opposed to the other way around? I feel as if sitting in a deep dark well, with a jest guarding its entrance. The jest has sole control of this aperture, deciding to partially cover its light as he pleases, but also obeys an unemotional king who calls the final shots. In knowing all of that, I can still look no where but up, to have any impression of the world. 

As I squat in my well, I also ponder how algorithms shape writing. Beside its influence on journalistic writing, most online businesses have to cater their content to search engine optimization (SEO) today. If you've read articles titled "5 ways to…" or "11 Tips to…" followed by one or two-sentence(s) paragraphs, you've likely encountered SEO blogs. As I have recently participated in SEO writings, I struggled to balance my drive to promote the business by using cheap SEO tactics against providing the most value in my writing. Nevertheless, my taste and style do not matter when my article is buried under the ashes of 2nd page Google results. Playing the algorithmic game becomes essential when all search returns after page 1 are decorative. 

#### 2) Entertainment

While readers don't expect literature from SEO blogs, algorithms are affecting our culture. In place of traditional broadcasting companies erects the new entertainment gatekeeper, Netflix and its competitors. With this transition of power, comes adaptation of control. Netflix uses AI to rank movie recommendations and selectively display art covers based on our previous choices. There is also a glaring recency bias, evident from the abysmal number of premillennial films. Compared to the previous pool of entertainment, arguably as vast as one's pirating abilities, we are now limited to what Netflix offers a contract to. 

Taking a Chomsky-esque approach of analysis, it seems inevitable that users absorb the ideological bias of the CEOs, investors and staff of these entertainment companies. An unsettling instance of this is, days after "13 Reason Why's premiere on Netflix, Google searches on "how to commit suicide" rose by 26%, "suicide prevention" by 23%, "suicide hotline number" by 21%. While these phenomenon are correlational, I find the suicide scene detailed and graphic having seen the premiered version myself. As drug cues can induce significant cravings in abstinent drug users, suicide cues may have an effect on those who have suicide ideation. A study on this cannot exist for ethical reasons, however it's intuitive that visual stimulus can affect our emotions. This example shows, on one hand, how Netflix's appeal to the mental health awareness narrative can backfire (for a lack of understanding). One the other hand, this raises the alarming issue of the shear scale Netflix's selection can affect its audiences.

Art has a role in our lives. Good art inspires and intrigues, and pursuing one is a novelty-seeking experience. It stimulates our brain and unlocks creativity. If we are however consuming art recommended by a similarity based algorithm, aren't we subverting the purpose of consuming art? As our movie selections get pigeonholed by Netflix's AI, are our tastes also trapped in a formula? Having a Netflix subscription 2014-2020, I wonder how much of my taste has been moulded by this entertainment empire and how much its algorithm. More importantly, does it matter, the difference between choice from our own volition which is influenced by our cultural environment, versus a program that shapes our tastes. Is it a matter of principle? 

