---
title: Algorithm, Culture and Social Engineer
tags: SHITS AND GIGGLES
description: Check out my courses and become more creative!
slug: roasted-veggies-are-fine
date: 05.06.2021
genre: essay
---

YOOOOOOOO

A history of institutional gatekeeping on culture and politics
 
Big corporates' sifting and moulding of our cultural and political views has been ubiquitous throughout history. Hearing "I'm going to make him an offer…," one might instinctually add " he can't refuse." When TV shows added laugh tracks, we were conditioned to anticipate comedy. When "the Office" decisively removed this comedic aid, some of us were re-sensitized to laughing at jokes. With a snap of a finger, CEOs of broadcasting company and Hollywood dictate which show goes on prime time, or becomes a blockbuster in cinemas, of which make their eventual way to our dinner conversation pieces. We had as much freedom to appreciate culture as culture was available. Though behind the majority of socio-cultural phenomenon stands a giant record label, broadcasting, publishing or media company. 

Then there's the advertising industry. Not only in itself an agent of consumption, marketing products from companies to customers, but also one nursing the monstrous value of capitalism. From its infancy in the 60s to today, advertising industry has only proliferated as a malignant tumour. Metastasizing each organ it touches, marketing has spread its psychological principles far beyond ad industry alone. Now industries after industries, websites after websites are leveraging our eyeballs for their value. No one is to blame, yet everyone is to blame. How much of our global capitalistic and now attention-driven value is shaped by this industry alone?

An essay on institutional censorship and information gatekeeping would be unjust if Edward Herman and Noam Chomsky's "Manufacturing Consent" goes unmentioned. Debuted three decades ago, the book crowns the most important commentary on media censorship. In their research, the authors show how media bias and omission occurs as often unintentional effect of its capitalistic operations and the five mechanisms through which they occur. Journalists and editors may pander to CEOs, investors and other stakeholders such as advertisers for article approval. Furthermore, it is more labour and cost intensive to conduct one's own research during the shortening news cycle. Taking government's statements or other sources as facts, and the lack of critical thinking is simply cheaper. 

By reconstituting history from journals and interviews published outside US, Chomsky reveals the history alien to many Americans. During Vietnam War, US had dropped more bombs in South Vietnam, supposedly under US protection, than from North Vietnam, the "commies", the enemy. This was done of course in US's geopolitical interest and was hidden from US media using a combination of the aforementioned mechanisms. Turning also a bind eye to Khmer Rouge's genocide in Cambodia initially, US only started condemning the group when the North Vietnam army escaped to Cambodia -- it was convenient. The most harrowing history of that region occurred when the North Vietnamese troops escaped to Laos' tropical forests  and US dropped more bombs in Laos than all the bombed dropped during World War II. As shocking as these facts may be, it shows a bleak reality of how media misinformation occurs as a sterile, unintentional by-product of capitalism. Yet, the consumer machine has shaped contemporary political stories and textbooks perspectives of history.

A cultural shaping done today

On information

As internet accelerates the economy of news content, capitalistic mechanism is logically more necessary for efficiency and competitiveness. I find wry irony in ABC publishing an article "Why are Australians so divided on COVID vaccines" when ABC itself heavily part-takes in the fear-mongering of blood-clot link. The majority of news article on the topic had "rare blood clot" in the title, without ever mentioning the exact condition, heparin-induced thrombosis-like events. Similar to one another, I question if many merely reworded other articles. Furthermore, using "four people in a million" as opposed to 0.0004% to convey the statistics, many articles seems to appeal to our emotional factors as opposed to actual probability. Before any studies that shows a significant increase on the prevalence of HIT-like thrombosis (as of the date I'm writing), how can media be so quick to write biased against vaccines? To provide some perspective, mortality rate from NASID/Aspirin induced GI complications are ~570 in a million, 160 times higher than AZ's blood clot occurrences. The over-reporting of this issue by the media is purely done for the purpose of content.

 In 2018, we've learnt that "fake news" and "echo chamber" can be man-made phenomenon, but can be infinitely exacerbated by the Algorithm. This article from the Conversation summarize how the content format of traditional media evolved to include more clickbait titles and videos for attention. Furthermore, content sharing department also grew heavily dependent on Facebook's AI. The "fake news" accusations that took storm in 2018 led FB to change its algorithm, directly impacting the company profit and its subsequent decision to lay off staff. As Australian regulators recently flopped its original news media ban on Facebook 2 months ago, big tech companies seem more invincible than ever. 

Slightly surprised by the leash algorithm has on media, I am more in despair. It is one analogous to the feeling of sitting in a deep well of which entrance is guarded by a jest. The jest can completely alter my view by throwing a mesh or a cloth over, yet he also obeys an unemotional king who makes the decision based on my mood. In knowing all of that, I can still look no where but up to have any impression of the world. 

On writing

As I squat in my well, I ponder how algorithms shape writing. Beside its influence on journalistic writing, most online businesses have to cater their content to search engine optimization (SEO) today. Familiar SEO titles are "5 ways to…" or "11 Tips to…" followed by numeric headings, one or two sentence paragraphs and front loaded SEO keywords. As I am also participating in SEO writing today, I struggle to balance my drive to promote the business to the best of my abilities vs. writing an insightful article that can get away with using as little as possible of SEO tactics. Nevertheless, SEO dictates my taste and standards don't matter when my article is buried under the ashes of 2nd page Google results. Playing the algorithmic game becomes essential when we understand all search returns after page 1 are decorative. 

On entertainment

While readers don't expect literature from SEO blogs, the question of how algorithms affects culture and cultural appreciation often tickles my brain. In place of traditional broadcasting companies stands the new entertainment gatekeeper, Netflix (and its competitors). With this transition of power comes adaptation to its control. Netflix's selection of shows and movies have a recency bias offering an abysmal number of premillennial films. Netflix's algorithm, display the cover version optimized to pique our interest does not seem malicious. Same goes for the match score. However, compared to the previous pool of entertainment which can be argued as vast as one's pirating abilities, we are now limited to shows/movies Netflix (or equivalent companies) contracts with. 

Though to what extent are we absorbing the ideological bias of the CEOs, investors and staff, taking a Chomsky-esque approach of analysis? While its capitalistic incentive dictates there's some pandering to audiences value for viewership,  its effect of gatekeeping can't be much different from the jest and unemotional king. An unsettling instance of this is , day after "13 Reason Why'"s premiere on Netflix, Google searches on "How to commit suicide" rose by 26%, "Suicide prevention" 23%. "suicide hotline number" 21%. Having seen the premiered version of the show, I find the suicide scene detailed and graphic. As drug cues can induce significant cravings imperviously abusing users, suicide cues may have an effect on those who have suicide ideation. Of course, a study on this cannot exist for ethical reasons, however it's quite intuitive that visual stimulus can affect our emotions. This case shows, on one hand, how Netflix's appeal to the current narrative of mental health awareness has backfired (for its lack of understanding). One the other hand, this raises the alarming issue of the shear scale Netflix's selection can affect its audiences.

Art has a role in our lives. Good art inspires and intrigues, and pursuing one is a novelty-seeking experience. It stimulates our brain and unlock creativity in unexpected ways. Therefore, Netflix's adoption of a similarity based algorithm subverts the purpose of consuming art. As our movie selection has been pigeonholed by Netflix's recommendation, is our tastes also trapped in a formula? Having a Netflix subscription 2014-2020, I wonder how much of my taste has been moulded by this entertainment empire and how much its algorithm. More importantly, does it matter, the difference between choice from our own volition which is influenced by our cultural environment, versus a program that shapes our tastes. Is it a matter of principle? 


